How Brown Saw the Baseball Game (also known as How Jones Saw the Baseball Game) is a 1907 American silent comedy short film distributed by the Lubin Manufacturing Company. The film follows a baseball fan, named Mr. Brown, who drinks large amounts of alcohol before a baseball game and becomes so drunk that the game appears to him to be going on in reverse. During production, special effects are used to achieve this effect. The identity of the cast and crew is unknown.

The film was released in November 1907. He received a positive review in 1908 in an issue of The Moving Picture World, a film magazine that reported that the film was a success and that it was "truly funny". It is unknown if a copy of the film has survived, implying that it is probably a lost film.

Film historians note similarities between the plot of How Brown Saw the Baseball Game and Edwin S. Porter's comedy, How the Office Boy Saw the Ball Game, released the previous year.

Plot[edit| edit code]
Before heading to a baseball game at a nearby baseball stadium, Brown drinks several cocktails.

He arrives at the stadium to watch the game, but he has become so drunk that the game appears to him to be played backwards, with the players running upside down on bases or the ball returning to the pitcher's hand.

Once the game is over, Mr. Brown is escorted home by one of his friends. When they arrive at the Browns' house, they meet his wife who becomes furious with the friend and begins to hit him, believing that he is responsible for her husband's condition.1

Production[edit| edit code]

Siegmund Lubin in 1913. His company produces and distributes How Brown Saw the Baseball Game.
How Brown Saw the Baseball Game was produced and distributed by the Lubin Manufacturing Company2, a company founded by German-American film pioneer Siegmund Lubin. At the time of the creation of How Brown Saw the Baseball Game, the company was creating and distributing up to three films per week3. The identity of the director of How Brown Saw the Baseball Game and that of the actors is not known4.

It is a silent film shot in black and white4, the final reel being composed of 110 meters of film5. For the scenes that take place at the baseball stadium, the filmmakers use an avant-garde form of special effects to show baseball players running backwards.6 Siegmund Lubin registered a copyright for the film, under the alternate title How Jones Saw the Baseball Game, on October 26, 19077.

Film release and reception[edit| code change]
How Brown Saw the Baseball Game began to be shown in theaters by the Lubin Manufacturing Company from November 16, 1907 and continued until August 19085,8. Meanwhile, the film is sometimes shown as part of a dual program with the 1907 film Neighbors Who Borrow, a comedy short about a man who lends almost everything he owns to his neighbors until his wife returns home and reprimands him for doing so.9

Advertisements for the film described it as "such fun" and Lubin himself promoted the film as a "screamingly funny farce"10,11. The film received a positive review in the June 1908 issue of The Moving Picture World, which described the film as "truly funny" and a "truly funny" theatrical hit.12

Modern writings often suggest that How Brown Saw the Baseball Game is an alternative or plagiarism of the Edwin S. Porter-directed comedy How the Office Boy Saw the Ball Game, published by Edison Studios in 190610,13. In it, an office worker sneaks out of his workplace to watch a baseball game and discovers his employer on a nearby seat.6 The Lubin Manufacturing Company was known for creating films very similar to those made by competing film studios. For example, the production company had already created films resembling other Edison Studios films such as Uncle Tom's Cabin or The Great Train Robbery3.

L'auteur Jack Spears écrit dans son livre Hollywood: The Golden Era que How Brown Saw the Baseball Game et How the Office Boy Saw the Ball Game « utilisaient pratiquement la même intrigue » (« used practically the same plot »)14. L'article de Rob Elderman The Baseball Film: to 1920 dans le journal Base Ball note également les similitudes dans leurs intrigues6.

In 2020, it's still unclear if there's still a copy of How Brown Saw the Baseball Game: it's probably become a lost movie. If found, it would have fallen into the public domain.4
