Barack Obama /bəˈɹɑːk oʊˈbɑːmə/1 (born August 4, 1961 in Honolulu, Hawaii) is an American statesman. He is the 44th President of the United States, serving from January 20, 2009 to January 20, 2017.

The son of a black Kenyan and a white American from Kansas of English and Irish descent, he was raised for several years in Indonesia. A graduate of Columbia University in New York and Harvard Law School, he was the first African-American to chair the prestigious Harvard Law Review in 1990. After working as a social worker in Chicago's South Side during the 1980s, then a civil lawyer after graduating from Harvard, he taught constitutional law at the University of Chicago from 1992 to 2004.

Married to Michelle Robinson in 1992, Barack Obama entered politics four years later: he was elected to the Illinois Senate, where he served three terms, from 1997 to 2004. He opposed the Iraq war launched by George W. Bush and became known nationally for his speech at the Democratic National Convention in July 2004, which nominated John Kerry as his presidential candidate. After failing to win the Democratic nomination for the House of Representatives in 2000, he was elected to the U.S. Senate in November 2004. He then ran in the Democratic presidential primaries against Hillary Clinton; Ahead in number of votes, he won by a slight margin in terms of delegates and thus became the party's candidate.

He received 52.9% of the vote and 365 electors in the 2008 presidential election against Republican John McCain. He was the first mixed-race man of African descent to become President of the United States. His career has aroused great interest among voters and the media around the world. His presidency comes against the backdrop of the war in Iraq, the war in Afghanistan, the crisis in the Middle East, a major recession in the US economy and the global financial and economic crisis. He is the recipient of the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize.

He promulgated an economic recovery plan, introduced the renewal of unemployment insurance authorizations and job creation, the one on the protection of patients and affordable care as well as a reform of financial regulation in 2010. In the field of foreign policy, he gradually withdrew US troops from Iraq, increased those in Afghanistan and signed an arms control treaty with Russia. He also commanded the operation that led to the death of Osama bin Laden. In 2011, during the Libyan civil war, he contributed to the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi. Running for re-election in the 2012 presidential election, he ran against Republican Mitt Romney, whom he defeated with 332 Electoral College votes and 51% of the national vote.

During his second term, Barack Obama tried to promote increased gun control and successful constitutional recognition of same-sex marriage. In foreign policy, he ordered military intervention in Iraq and Syria against the Islamic State. It continues the process of withdrawing U.S. forces from Afghanistan. In 2013, he ordered at the last minute a retaliatory operation against the regime of Bashar al-Assad, while the latter uses chemical weapons against the civilian population of the rebel areas of Syria. He ratifies the Paris climate agreement, reaches an Iran nuclear deal, and normalizes U.S. relations with Cuba.

If his last months of presidency are marked by a rising popularity, with a majority of favorable opinions at the national level, the Republican Donald Trump succeeds him after winning the presidential election of 2016 against the candidate of the Democratic Party, Hillary Clinton, who had received the support of Barack Obama. After the 2020 presidential election, Joe Biden, vice president of the United States during Obama's two terms, succeeds Donald Trump.

Personal situation
Birth and origins
Barack2 Hussein Obama II /bəˈɹɑːk huːˈseɪn oʊˈbɑːmə/1 Listen was born on August 4, 1961 at 7:24 p.m. at Kapiolani Maternity Hospital in Honolulu.3

Genealogy
[show]
Ancestry of Barack Obama
 
Paternal family
His father, Barack Obama, Senior (born in Nyang'oma Kogelo in 1936 and died on 24 November 1982 in Nairobi in a car accident), was a Kenyan economist and politician, of Luo ethnicity4. His parents met in 1960 during Russian language classes at the University of Hawaii at Mānoa5,6. In his autobiography, Part III, including Granny's account of the family origins and lives of Hussein and Barack, Sr., Barack Obama provides a fairly long genealogy in his father's line (12 generations above him) and indicates that the family lived from nomadic herding in the region of Uganda before settling in Kenya.  to Alego7 and then to Kendu Bay8.

Barack Obama's great-grandfather, Jr. was simply called Obama (so he is the eponymous ancestor) and lived in Kendu Bay in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. His grandfather, Hussein Onyango Obama (1895-1979), is presented as a rather original character; he was the first resident of Kendu Bay to come into contact with the British in Kisumu, around 1910. Immediately, he adopted a modern lifestyle (European clothes, learning to read and write, exceptional concern for hygiene). Disowned by his father and brothers, he put himself at the service of the colonizer. During the First World War, he was responsible for organizing chores in Kenya and then in Tanganyika. After the war, he worked as a servant and cook for various British bosses; at the same time, he returned to his roots by buying land in Kendu Bay and taking a wife, Helima (then a second, Akumu, then a third, Sarah). During the Second World War, he was in the service of a British officer in different places (Burma, Thailand, Ceylon, Europe). After his return, he stopped working as a domestic servant and became a full-time farmer; it was also the time he left Kendu Bay and settled in Alego.

In the 1950s, he was detained for six months following a slanderous denunciation of links with the Kenyan nationalist movement (KANU). Recognized innocent, he nevertheless emerged physically and morally weakened from this ordeal9.

Of his three wives, he had eight children.10

Barack Obama Senior was the second child born in 1936 in Kendu Bay. His mother is Akumu. Barack Obama, Sr., who died in 1982, was educated in the Muslim religion but was nevertheless an atheist.11 After Akumu's departure12 in 1945, he was raised by Hussein Onyango's third wife in the village of Alego; when he completed his brilliant, though inassiduous, primary education, he was admitted to the missionary school in Maseno, but was expelled for indiscipline, before completing his secondary education. He worked for several years as an office worker in Mombasa and Nairobi and married his first wife, Kezia. He was fortunate to be spotted as very gifted by two American academics who made him take a correspondence course and make him take the high school leaving examination at the United States Embassy; it was again with their support that he applied for scholarships from several American universities, and in 1959 he received a favourable response from the University of Hawaii. He followed a course in econometrics, obtained the highest marks of his class and founded the association of foreign students13.

[show]
Genealogy of the Obama family
 
Maternal family
Article connexe : Ann Dunham.
His mother, Stanley14 Ann Dunham (born 1942 and died 1995), was the daughter of Stanley (born March 23, 1918 and died February 8, 1992) and Madelyn Dunham (born October 26, 1922 and died November 3, 2008)15. The Dunham family is Christian, but Ann, an adult, is agnostic. The ancestry[when?] of Stanley Ann Dunham's white family seems to have counted the first black slave on the continent: John Punch according to the site ancestry.com16, but he also has a family link with Abraham Lincoln17 and ancestors from Bischwiller in Alsace.

Ann Dunham was born in Wichita, Kansas,4 near a military base3. His father was called up in 1942 to serve as a GI in the U.S. Army. During the war, Dunham worked in the Wichita aircraft factories. After serving in Europe in George Patton's army, Stanley Dunham became a furniture salesman. The Dunham family moved quite often, living successively in California, Kansas, Texas, Washington (Seattle) before leaving for Hawaii in 1959. Stanley experienced professional setbacks, but Madelyn took a job as a bank executive.

Stanley Ann was studying anthropology at the University of Hawaii when she met Barack Sr18.

Barack Obama was raised by his maternal grandparents beginning in 1971. Being very attached to Madelyn ("Toot", Americanization of Tutu, "grandmother" in Hawaiian), the candidate even interrupted his campaign to take care of her while she was suffering in Hawaii. Madelyn Dunham died on November 3, 200815, the very day before her grandson was elected President of the United States.

Stepfamily
Barack Obama's parents married on February 2, 196119. In August 1963, his father was accepted to Harvard University but he left alone for Massachusetts because the scholarship he had obtained did not allow him to support his wife and son. The divorce was pronounced in January 1964. After graduating in economics in 1965, Barack Obama's father returned to Kenya where he started a new family. Initially a prominent man close to Jomo Kenyatta's government, he ended up opposing the president's plans. Sacked and boycotted, he fell into poverty and alcoholism before killing himself in a car accident in 198213. He stayed in Hawaii between December 1971 and January 1972 and this was the only opportunity for his 10-year-old son to see him.

Ann Dunham remarried in 1965 to a student from Indonesia, Lolo Soetoro, who returned to her country in 1966; Ann and Barack joined him in Jakarta20 in 1967. Barack spent four years in Indonesia. He first attended St. Francis of Assisi Catholic primary school for two years, then a public school where he was the only foreigner.19 In his registration file, he would have chosen, among the five religions proposed, that of his father-in-law, Jaganism21, a local branch of the Muslim religion22. During the 2008 nomination campaign, neoconservative columnist Daniel Pipes claimed that Obama had been a practicing Muslim during his stay in Indonesia (i.e. between 6 and 10 years)23. Obama says his home was not religious.

In 1971, his mother sent him to Hawaii to live with his maternal grandparents, so that he could attend American high school (since the beginning of the Indonesian stay, she had him take a correspondence course and, in the last months, required him to get up very early to work with her before going to school); he was enrolled at the Punahou School, a prestigious private institution in Hawaii24 for which he obtained a scholarship. The following year, Ann, separated from Lolo Soetoro, joined him with Maya and, beginning new studies, undertook a master's degree devoted to the anthropology of Indonesia. According to Maya, her mother's education for her two children at that time was "idealistic and demanding."25 In 1975, Ann returned to Indonesia to complete the fieldwork required for her degree, but Barack refused to follow her.25 She became responsible for a program to help poor women organized by the Ford Foundation and then helped develop the Indonesian microcredit system25. She completed her PhD in 1992 with a thesis entitled The peasant blacksmithing in Indonesia26. On November 7, 1995, she died in Hawaii, at the age of 52, of ovarian cancer. Barack Obama bitterly regrets not having been at his side at the time of his death.

Barack Obama recounts his childhood and youth (until 1988) in his autobiography My Father's Dreams.27

Religious beliefs

The Obama couple at the African Methodist Episcopal Church in Washington in January 2013.
Barack Obama joined the Protestant faith as an adult. As he wrote in his book The Audacity of Hope,28 he was raised outside of any religious teaching in an atheist home, his father being from a Muslim family and his mother from a Christian family. In January 2008, Barack Obama told Christianity Today: "I am a Christian, and a practicing Christian. I believe in the redemptive death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. I believe that faith opens a way for me to be cleansed of all sin and obtain eternal life.29 »

It was African-American pastor Jeremiah Wright who brought Barack Obama to the Christian faith as a result of his involvement with him in social service within the African-American community. Barack Obama was then a twenty-year member of his parish, Trinity United Church of Christ, which belongs to the United Church of Christ, a Reformed and congregationalist church. Wright also married Barack and Michelle Obama, baptized their two daughters and blessed their home. He was the first person to be named in Barack Obama's acceptance speech after his election to the United States Senate in 200430. However, in 2008, Pastor Wright's very virulent public statements about the slave past of the United States, whites and Jews greatly embarrassed the presidential candidate. Conservative circles took advantage of Pastor Wright's statements to accuse Barack Obama of being aligned with radical and unpatriotic positions.30

Faced with the growing controversy and its consequences on his electoral campaign, Barack Obama then left this church and condemned the extreme remarks of his former pastor, while refusing to condemn en bloc the parish of Trinity United Church of Christ, which is one of the largest black churches in Chicago and one of the most active in the social and solidarity field30.


Barack and Michelle Obama in 2008.
After moving to Washington in 2009, the Obama family attended services at several Protestant churches, including Siloam Baptist Church and St. John's Episcopal Church, as well as Evergreen Chapel at Camp David, but did not regularly attend services at any of them.31,32

Private and family life

Obama with his daughters in the snow.
On October 3, 1992, he married Michelle Robinson, a lawyer from Chicago whom he met in 1989 at the law firm where he works and where she is an associate. The Obama couple will have two daughters, Malia Ann (born 1998) and Natasha, better known by her nickname Sasha (born 2001). Michelle Robinson-Obama was a renowned lawyer, an influential figure in the local Democratic Party and close to Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley. It was she who propelled her husband's political career13,33 whereas he had, until then, only actively campaigned to support Bill Clinton's candidacy for the presidency of the United States, and that of Carol Moseley-Braun for the Senate.

Education and professional career
Baccalaureate (1983)
After high school, Barack Obama studied for two years at Occidental College in Los Angeles (California) and then entered Columbia University in New York. He graduated in 198334 with a bachelor's degree in political science, specializing in international relations.

First experiences (1983-1985)
Even before graduating from Columbia University, Barack Obama considered becoming a "community organizer"36, but his efforts with various organizations (including the mayor of Chicago, recently led by a black man, Harold Washington) were unsuccessful. He joined a consulting firm (Business International Corporation37) working for multinationals in New York, first as a research assistant and then as a financial analyst, an important function that allowed him to have an office and a secretary. Following a contact with his aunt Auma, he decided to reorient himself towards community work and left his company. Still in New York, he experienced a period of precarious work (he worked for three months for Ralph Nader's organization), then was recruited by a Chicago activist, Jerry Kellman (whom he called Marty Kaufman in his autobiography).

Chicago (1985-1988)
In the summer of 198533, he chose to work as a community organizer in the impoverished black neighborhood of Bronzeville, a suburb of Chicago. He became an assistant to Jerry Kellman, a Christian social worker and member of a network of progressive churches. Until 1987, Barack Obama, nicknamed "Baby Face" by local pastors, roamed the South Side to help residents organize in defense of their interests, to obtain the removal of asbestos from public housing, the opening of hiring offices, or to fight against juvenile delinquency. It was during this period that Barack Obama, raised without religion,38 approached the United Church of Christ led in the neighborhood by Pastor Jeremiah Wright, and embraced the Protestant religion.

Harvard (1988-1991)
During 1987, he applied to several universities and was accepted into Harvard in February 1988. He left Chicago in May 1988 and after a tourist stay in Europe, left for his first trip to Kenya. He then studied for three years33 at Harvard Law School in Cambridge near Boston; He graduated with magna laude. In 1990, he was the first African-American39 elected (against 18 other candidates) editor of the prestigious Harvard Law Review, which is reported by the national press.

Teacher (1991-2004)
At the end of his studies, instead of becoming an assistant to Justice Abner Mikva, Barack Obama returned to Chicago to become a professor of constitutional law at the University of Chicago where he worked until 200433. He joined a law firm specializing in civil rights.

Political career
Senator from Illinois (1997–2004)
In 1996, Barack Obama was elected to the Illinois Senate in the 13th district, covering the South Side neighborhoods of Chicago33 including Hyde Park, in which he lived with his wife and two daughters until he entered the White House. He chaired the Public Health Committee when Democrats regained the majority in the state Senate.

He supported legislation to extend medical coverage to the poorest, championed the cause of homosexuals and increased funding for the fight against AIDS. His tenure was marked by his ability to obtain, through compromise, Republican assent on laws such as those against racial profiling, video surveillance of police interrogations and a moratorium on the use of the death penalty in Illinois.13

In 2000, he tried to be nominated in the Democratic primaries to be a candidate for the U.S. House of Representatives, but was defeated with 30% of the vote to 61% for Bobby Rush, the incumbent Democratic incumbent and former historical figure of the Black Panther Party.

Barack Obama also made national prominence in 2002 when he refused to endorse the neoconservatives' explanations of a necessary invasion of Iraq. "I am not someone who opposes war in all circumstances. I am opposed to a stupid war, not based on reason, but on passion, not on principles, but on politics," he declared on October 2, 2002 in Chicago.40 This opposition to the war launched by the Bush administration on March 19, 2003 and approved by a large majority of the United States Senate (notably by Hillary Clinton41), will serve as a reference throughout his campaign for the nomination of the American presidential election of 2008 to counter his opponents.

United States Senator (2004–2008)
Main article: 2004 United States Senate election in Illinois

Official portrait of Barack Obama as a federal senator for Illinois (2005).
In the fall of 2002, he hired political consultant David Axelrod and officially announced his candidacy for the United States Senate in January 200342. Among the members of his campaign finance committee was a notorious fugitive, Tony Rezko.43,44 In July 2004, he gave a speech at the Democratic Convention in Boston nominating John Kerry as the party's presidential nominee. He glorifies the American dream, the generous America, recalling his family origins. He calls for the unity of all Americans and denounces the divisive "mistakes" and "extremism" of the George W. Bush administration. This speech, The Audacity of Hope45, which appeared in the print media and on television, introduced Barack Obama to Democratic activists but also to many Americans46.

On November 2, 2004, after beating his Democratic opponents a few months earlier in the primaries, Barack Obama was elected to the United States Senate with 70% of the vote against 27% for his Republican opponent, the former African-American ambassador and conservative political columnist Alan Keyes. The score is not a surprise. For several months, Barack Obama spent much of his election campaign without any opponent appointed against him following the last-minute withdrawal of Jack Ryan, the Republican candidate; the latter had himself succeeded Blair Hull, the winner of the primaries. With both mired in scabrous affairs with their respective wives, it was only two months before the election that Alan Keyes was nominated as the Republican candidate despite the fact that he resided in Maryland, had no connection to Illinois and that in 2000 he had denounced Hillary Clinton's parachuting into New York.

Barack Obama succeeds incumbent Republican Senator Peter Fitzgerald. He was sworn in as a senator on January 4, 2005, becoming the only man of colour to sit in the Senate, and the fifth in history.47 He resigned as a senator on November 16, 2008, following his election as President of the United States.

2008 presidential election
Circle-icons-scissors.svg	This section is too long. It could benefit from being shortened or divided into several subsections.
It is also possible that its length creates an imbalance in the article, to the point of compromising neutrality by giving disproportionate importance to one aspect of the topic.
Presidential primaries

Barack Obama campaigning in South Carolina in August 2007.
On 16 January 2007, he announced the creation of an exploratory committee to raise funds for a candidacy for the 2008 presidential election; On February 10, 2007, he declared his candidacy for the Democratic nomination48, despite his relative inexperience and competition in the Democratic camp of Hillary Clinton, hitherto favorite for the primaries. On December 15, 2007, he received the support of the prestigious national daily The Boston Globe49.

Throughout 2007, he insisted that he embodied change and opposed partisan politics.50 His candidacy excites some independent voters and young people50. He won the support of many personalities such as Senator John Kerry, businessmen Warren Buffett and George Soros, actors George Clooney, Matt Damon, Will Smith, Ben Affleck, Robert De Niro, actresses Halle Berry, Sophia Bush and Scarlett Johansson, rocker Bruce Springsteen, singer Nicole Scherzinger, rapper Nas, novelist Toni Morrison or television host Oprah Winfrey,  An extremely influential figure in his country, particularly within the African-American community.51 On April 21, 2008, he also gained the support of filmmaker Michael Moore.

On January 3, 2008, Barack Obama created a surprise52 by winning the first primaries, the caucuses of Iowa, a white state with more than 96%, with 38% of the votes cast, far ahead of Senator John Edwards (30%) and former First Lady Hillary Clinton who obtained 29%53, thus demonstrating for the first time that a half-breed could have a real chance at the national level.

He then succeeded in imposing on the primary campaign, both Democratic and Republican, the theme of "change". On 8 January, he lost in New Hampshire (37%) to Hillary Clinton (39%) despite polls announcing him as the favourite with a 10-point lead54. His defeat speech is tinged with hope and remotivation. From this defeat Barack Obama draws his new slogan: "Yes we can", promised great fame. According to the sources, it has its origin in the rallying cry launched in 1972 by the trade unionist César Chávez ("Sí se puede"), to whom Obama will pay tribute once elected55, or in the slogan of Dolores Huerta, a civil rights activist in the 1960s to whom Barack Obama presented a high distinction56.


Barack Obama and his family in Springfield, Illinois, on February 10, 2007.
After a controversy with Hillary Clinton over civil rights and the respective roles of Martin Luther King and President Lyndon B. Johnson, he again came second in terms of votes, behind Hillary Clinton, in the Nevada caucus of January 19 (51% to 45%). Nevertheless, Barack Obama obtained a majority of thirteen delegates against twelve for Hillary Clinton, which is why he refused to concede defeat. He also mentions irregularities in the vote that he blames on the Clinton camp, accusing Bill Clinton and his wife of distorting the facts against him57.

On January 27, his very large victory (55% against 27% for Hillary Clinton) in the South Carolina primaries58 revived his candidacy in the run-up to Super Tuesday on February 5.

On January 28, he obtained the support of Caroline Kennedy59, as well as Edward Moore Kennedy and Patrick Kennedy60.

On Super Tuesday, February 5, Barack Obama won thirteen states, compared to nine for Hillary Clinton.

On February 2, Will.i.am recorded Yes We Can, a song inspired by a speech given by Obama following the 2008 New Hampshire primary. Mixed with images and excerpts from the speech, it is performed by many celebrities (most American musicians, singers and comedians) supporting Senator Obama. The song was produced by Will.i.am, the music video was directed by Jesse Dylan, the son of singer Bob Dylan61.


Barack Obama surrounded by supporters at a rally in Connecticut in February 2008.
On February 9, he won the states of Washington, Nebraska, Louisiana and the Virgin Islands. The next day, February 10, he won the state of Maine. On February 12, by winning the three Democratic primaries in Virginia, Maryland and Washington, Barack Obama gained an advantage in the race for the 2,025 delegates needed for the Democratic nomination. With 1,231 delegates, he is now ahead of Hillary Clinton (1,196 delegates), winning the confidence not only of a good part of the African-American electorate but also that of the elderly (53% against 47% for Hillary Clinton) and women (58%); Whites remain somewhat supportive of Hillary Clinton (48% vs. 51%).62

On February 19, he won the primaries in Wisconsin and Hawaii, scoring ten consecutive victories over Hillary Clinton.

On February 22, with more than 65% of the vote, Illinois Senator Barack Obama easily won the expatriate Democratic primary. In France, it exceeds the 70% mark.63

On March 4, he won in Vermont but lost in Ohio and Rhode Island. In Texas, he won more representatives at the convention than Hillary Clinton (99 to 94). He maintains a lead of more than 100 delegates.

He won the Wyoming primary on March 8 and the Mississippi primary three days later.

On March 18, 2008, he gave an important speech in Philadelphia64 on the racial question.

On April 22, Hillary Clinton wins the Pennsylvania primary65; his campaign, which could not afford to further delay, then benefited from a second wind at the expense of Obama's. The latter has been weakened in public opinion by his ambiguous attitude towards the verbal excesses of his former pastor, the communitarian Jeremiah Wright66, as well as by accusations of elitism.

Thus, on May 3, he won by only seven votes the caucuses of Guam, Pacific island, with 50.08% of the vote against 49.92% for Hillary Clinton.

On May 6, he won the state of North Carolina with 56% of the vote but lost by 22,000 votes in Indiana (49% of the vote).67

On May 13, Hillary Clinton won the West Virginia primary with 67% of the vote to Barack Obama's 26%. The candidate enjoys a massive vote of white and modest voters, very numerous in this state68. Obama was nevertheless able to catch up with the latter category of voters and with the "blue collar workers" (white workers) thanks to the rallying of John Edwards, announced the day after the West Virginia primary69.

At this stage of the primaries, the final five upcoming consultations will be of relative importance, with neither candidate able to secure a qualifying majority of ordinary delegates, while the superdelegates, who remain split between Obama (282), Clinton (273) and indecision (about 240), will likely have the final say at the Democratic Convention in August. Some observers, however, are counting on a Clinton withdrawal before the end of the process.70

On May 20, Obama and Clinton both won a primary. The first won in Oregon (58% of the vote), the second in Kentucky (65% of the vote).71

On May 30, he left the United Church of Christ following controversy over the comments of Wright and Rev. Michael Pfleger. Obama had been a member of this Church for twenty years.72,73

On June 3, after the last primaries (Montana and South Dakota), he reached the required threshold of 2,118 delegates, as well as the support of many superdelegates74. Despite Clinton's claim of a majority of the "popular vote" (in the number of activist votes) and the senator's refusal to declare defeat, Obama is now almost certain to be nominated for the White House at the Democratic convention at the end of August.

On June 7, Hillary Clinton "suspended" her campaign for the Democratic nomination and supported Barack Obama in his presidential campaign against Republican John McCain75.

Democratic nomination
On August 27, the third day of the 2008 Democratic National Convention in Denver, Obama was officially inaugurated by acclamation, or roll call, launched by Senator Hillary Clinton76. More than twenty years after the Reverend Jesse Jackson, three times candidate for the Democratic nomination and first to win primaries, notably in 1988, he is the first mixed African-American39 invested for the presidential election by a major party77.

Financing his election campaign
Regarding the financing of electoral campaigns, weakly regulated by American legislation, Barack Obama declares himself in favor of a system of public financing and indicates even before his declaration of candidacy that he would finance his presidential campaign if his Republican rival did the same.

However, in June 2008, he decided to base his campaign on private fundraising, thus escaping the fundraising limit imposed in case of public funding78. He became the first candidate to do without these federal funds since Congress passed campaign finance laws, drafted after the Watergate scandal.79

More than 40% of Obama's campaign funds come from California, New York and Illinois, traditionally Democratic states.80

Obama's top 5 donor groups are shareholders, employees, or members of80:

The University of California;
Goldman Sachs: The bank raises more money for Obama's presidential campaign than any other Wall Street-listed bank or company, more than a million dollars from its employees and executives81. Subsequently, several former Goldman executives held senior positions in the Obama administration81,82 and the bank's influence on the Obama administration sparked debate.83 Observers point in particular to the direct and indirect aid received by the bank in 2008 and 2009 during the subprime crisis in relation to the aid provided to Lehman Brothers forced to go bankrupt81,83;
Le Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics ;
Microsoft ;
JPMorgan Chase.
Presidential campaign
Main article: Barack Obama's 2008 presidential campaign
Election against McCain

Distribution of the Electoral College by State in 2008. In blue, the states won by Obama and Biden; in red, those won by McCain and Palin. For each State is indicated the number of electors.
With a record turnout of 63% of registered voters,84 Barack Obama won the presidential election on November 4, 2008 by more than 9 million votes85 over his opponent John McCain. The victory was clear both at the level of the grand electors (365 to 17386.87) and in the popular vote (52.9% to 45.6%)88. In addition to his victories in the hotly contested swing states of Ohio and Florida, Obama narrowly toppled traditional Republican strongholds like Indiana,89 and even won the votes of two former Confederate states (in addition to Florida): Virginia90 and North Carolina.91 Barack Obama wins in all age groups, except those over 65, and enjoys a stronger mobilization of young voters, while 68% of 18-25 year olds voted in his favour92. He also won the votes of 54% of Catholics, 78% of Jews, as well as 67% of Latinos and 95% of African Americans.93

On the evening of November 4, 2008, he delivered his victory speech to several hundred thousand people in Grant Park, Chicago, Illinois.94 After thanking all his supporters (family, collaborators, voters), he evokes the major issues of his future mandate; in particular the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the economic crisis. His speech is tinged with significant references to the inaugural speeches of John F. Kennedy, Abraham Lincoln and also to the speeches of Martin Luther King; in particular, he quotes word for word a passage from Abraham Lincoln's speech at his first inauguration.95

The election of Barack Obama is generally very well received abroad, where it is often the occasion for popular celebrations. Kenya, his father's native country, even declares a public holiday. Also unprecedented, governments traditionally on very bad terms with the United States are congratulating the new president, such as Raúl Castro (Cuba), Hugo Chávez (Venezuela) and Mahmoud Ahmadinejad (Iran). From South Africa, he is also congratulated by Nobel Peace Prize winner and former President Nelson Mandela96.

Barack Obama was formally elected by the electorate on 15 December 2008 — his victory having been officially proclaimed in the United States Congress by Dick Cheney on 8 January 2009)97 — and he succeeded George W. Bush on 20 January 2009. He then became the forty-fourth president of the United States, and the first African-American39 to accede to the White House.

The beginning of his presidency began against the backdrop of the war in Iraq, the war in Afghanistan and a major recession in the American economy.

Barack Obama owes his victory in particular to the vote of many first-time voters, recruited thanks to a revolutionary campaign to mobilize donors, activists, and finally voters. This mobilization was based on three main levers: the message, new technologies and field organization.

The message is "change", based on emotion, on the model of community organizing campaigns, making voters the actors of this change. The ability of Obama's campaign (or organization) to channel the flow of money and volunteers was a determining factor in his victory; by taking and improving on the model set up by the Republicans eight years earlier, Obama was able to channel and build on his popular success.98

New technologies are Internet tools that are used primarily to recruit supporters and organize activism. There are social networks, such as Facebook, on which Barack Obama is by far the person in the world with the most declared supporters, with nearly five million supporters in January 200999, but also an exceptional database called Catalist, "a unique file that individually lists 220 million Americans, with up to 600 pieces of information per person,"  and to accurately target all voters to develop personalized messages.100

Finally, the field organization combines mobilization communication, local activism and a fundraising campaign, structured in geographical groups (DC for Obama, etc.) or thematic groups (Students for Obama, Lawyers for Obama, etc.), organized on the model of the telethon, which ultimately allows Barack Obama to benefit from a budget of $ 750 million against $ 350 million for John McCain. In total, Barack Obama raised an army of 1.2 million activists, representing 25% of the campaign budget ($200 million). These activists approached, directly or by phone, nearly 68 million Americans, more than half of voters and 99% of target voters.100

Presidential transition
Related article: Presidency of Barack Obama.
The indirect U.S. presidential election meant that the president-elect did not take office until eleven weeks after the popular vote. This period between Election Day on November 4 and Inauguration Day, the day of the presidential inauguration on January 20, is a phase of appointment of the new presidential administration and transition with the outgoing administration. The first appointment of the new administration is that of Rahm Emanuel as White House Chief of Staff. Many names were circulating as to the various secretaries and, on 1 December, it was announced that her former rival for the nomination Hillary Clinton would be proposed by the Obama administration as Secretary of State101. The main positions are filled from the beginning of December. Although Obama focused his presidential campaign on the slogan of change, there is a preponderance of veterans of the Clinton administration in the new team, out of a claimed concern to benefit from their experience in the face of the crisis.


Meeting between President-in-Office George W. Bush and President-elect Barack Obama in the Oval Office, November 10, 2008.
In keeping with his promises to overcome the bipartisan divide102, Obama maintains in defense his incumbent appointed by George W. Bush in 2006, Robert Gates, a close friend of the Republicans103 and the Bush family in particular104; he also met his unfortunate opponent John McCain twice in mid-November 2008 and on January 19, 2009, at a ball in honor of the former Vietnam veteran105. He also appointed two other men close to the Republicans in his administration, Ray LaHood (former Republican representative) as Secretary of Transportation and General James L. Jones, close to John McCain106, as National Security Advisor.

President Bush wanted this transition to go as smoothly as possible, Obama quickly gained access to classified information and received the same security reports as the president still in office, by the CIA and the FBI.

Arguing that there can only be one sitting U.S. president at a time, Barack Obama made the controversial choice to remain largely silent in December 2008 and January 2009 during the Israeli offensive against Hamas in Gaza. It slowed down very significantly a few days before his inauguration.


First official portrait of Barack Obama as President of the United States (2009).
Obama enjoys enhanced security, very similar to that of the sitting president. It is provided by the Secret Service, the federal agency responsible for protecting the president, vice president and various personalities. He traveled in an armored convoy and his home in Hyde Park and the federal building in Chicago serving as his headquarters during this transition period were closely monitored. The president-elect did not move to Washington until early January 2009.

During election campaigns, the main candidates in the US presidential election enjoy protection from the Secret Service for 120 days before the election, since the decision of President Lyndon B. Johnson following the assassination of the prospective candidate of the Democratic Party, Robert Kennedy, in 1968, in the middle of the electoral campaign. Candidate Obama was the first, in May 2007, to benefit because of the risk of attacks by white supremacists107. This protection was, as for the Republican candidate, reinforced after their respective nomination as their party's candidate.

President of the United States (2009–2017)
Main article: Presidency of Barack Obama
First presidential term
Main article: First inauguration of Barack Obama

Barack Obama in the Oval Office on the first day of his presidency.
On January 20, 2009 at 12:07 p.m., Barack Obama was sworn in at the Capitol in Washington, D.C., in front of an unprecedented crowd estimated at more than 2 million people, and in front of hundreds of millions of television viewers around the world. He was thus officially inaugurated as the 44th president, in an atmosphere of unusual national and international fervour (nearly 8 out of 10 Americans gave him their confidence in the face of the crisis). Symbolically, the first African-American mixed-race president reuses the Bible that was used in 1861 for the inauguration of Abraham Lincoln. In the preceding days, he had remade the latter's journey from Philadelphia to Washington that year, and had addressed the crowd from the Lincoln Memorial.

As a sign of national unity, Barack Obama chose a gay Episcopalian bishop to say the opening prayer of his inauguration festivities, an anti-abortion evangelical pastor for the opening prayer of the ceremony, and a famous veteran of the civil rights movement, former companion of Martin Luther King, for the closing prayer. The inauguration speech of the new president insists on "the triumph of hope over fear", on the "refusal to choose between our ideals and our security" and on international dialogue, without hiding from the Americans the difficulties that await them108.

Chief Justice John G. Roberts, Jr. misplaced an adverb when reciting the constitutional formula ("... that I will execute the Office of President to the United States faithfully" instead of "[...] that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the United States"), and thus makes the new president hesitate, the swearing-in is redone in private the next day, January 21 at the White House to avoid any possible legal challenge109.

Barack Obama is considered a pragmatic politician, adept at compromise to advance his ideas and projects and able to bring together various categories of the electorate, even if his votes in Congress may have placed him to the left of the party110. His January 2010 State of the Union address, coming shortly after losing the supermajority in the Senate with the election of Ted Kennedy's successor in Massachusetts, emphasized the need to reform global finance, in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, and called on Democrats and Republicans to pass legislation to thwart the Supreme Court's ruling.  Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission, 21 January 2010, which expands the possibilities of election financing by companies (domestic and foreign)111. The loss of the majority in the Senate jeopardizes the reform of the social protection system. Obama is also adept at a broad openness of (unclassified) information held by administrations and government agencies to the public, as well as a participatory and collaborative approach, which he translated, from his first day of work in the White House by the Open Government Initiative.


Barack Obama meets Pope Benedict XVI on July 10, 2009 at the Vatican.
Barack Obama is presented as a follower of multilateralism, supporter of realpolitik, and takes as a model James Baker, praising the American foreign policy conducted under the presidency of George H. W. Bush during the First Gulf War in 1991 and the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989112. His foreign policy is implemented by his Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton. If he wants to be firmer on North Korea's nuclear program, his main proposals are a withdrawal within 16 months of US troops (fighters) from Iraq, which would begin as soon as he takes office, and the beginning of a dialogue "without preconditions" with Iran113. However, he said after his election that he considered Iran's nuclear program "unacceptable". This statement was criticised by the Speaker of the Iranian Parliament, Ali Larijani114.

Regarding relations with Israel and the Palestinians, after being ambivalent, he delivered a speech on 4 June 2008 at the conference of the pro-Israeli coterie Aipac (American Israel Public Affairs Committee) in which he expressed his support for the status of Jerusalem as the undivided capital of the State of Israel115,69. Observers note, however, that relations between Barack Obama and Israeli leaders, particularly Benjamin Netanyahu, are less warm than those maintained by his predecessors.116

On July 10, 2009, he met Pope Benedict XVI at the Vatican on the sidelines of the G8 summit. President Obama has made a commitment to him to try to reduce the number of abortions.


Peres, Netanyahu and Obama in Tel Aviv in 2013.
On May 1, 2011, at approximately 11:20 p.m. (Eastern Time), he announced the death, by U.S. special forces, of the main leader of the jihadist network Al-Qaeda, Osama bin Laden117, considered to be the mastermind of the attacks of September 11, 2001. This announcement provoked scenes of jubilation in the United States, and many positive reactions around the world118. In the hours of extreme tension preceding a secret assault with an uncertain outcome, he performed at the White House correspondents' dinner, a memorable exercise in style in which he displayed all his humour119.


Obama and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev, November 14, 2010.
During the First Libyan Civil War, he supported the rebels of the National Transitional Council and adhered to the military intervention under the aegis of the United Nations (UN): Operation Odyssey Dawn, which participated in the overthrow of Muammar Gaddafi. In 2016, he judged that the lack of follow-up after this military operation was "the worst mistake of his presidency", acknowledging that Washington has a share of responsibility for the Libyan "chaos"120,121.

In the context of the Syrian civil war, it first seems to be engaging in a process leading to an air military intervention in case the regime of Bashar al-Assad crosses the "red line" it defines in 2012, namely the use of chemical weapons against the civilian population of rebel areas. To the great surprise of its allies, mainly the France which had already announced joint strikes following the sarin gas attacks of 21 August 2013 which killed between 1,000 and 2,000 people, it suspended and then cancelled planned reprisal operations on 31 August. Barack Obama says he is "very proud" of this decision by which he wishes to mark a break with the American interventionist tradition, and refer to the international community for this kind of intervention; however, it is seen as a real betrayal by François Hollande and considered as an abandonment of Syria to Vladimir Putin by critics of the strategy of the President of the United States.

He delivered a speech at al-Azhar University in Cairo on 4 June 2009 that was seen as presenting a major shift in international relations between the United States and Muslims.122 This university is the most important center in the Arab world for the training of ulema123. During this speech, in the presence of the Muslim Brotherhood guests of honor against the advice of Hosni Mubarak, President Obama attributed to Islam almost all the major inventions of human history, also presenting the United States as "a great Muslim country"124. He also spoke in favour of not regulating the wearing of the veil: "It is important for Western countries to avoid embarrassing Muslim citizens to practice their religion as they wish, and for example by dictating the clothes that a woman must wear" and added: "Hostility towards a religion must not be concealed in the face of the pretense of liberalism." According to many observers, this criticism of a Western country is aimed at France and its secularism policy125,126.


On February 18, 2010, Barack Obama met with the Dalai Lama in the Map Room at the White House.
In October 2010, regarding the awarding of the Nobel Peace Prize to China's Liu Xiaobo, he said:

"The Nobel Committee has chosen an eloquent and courageous spokesperson for the cause of universal values... Over the past thirty years, China has made spectacular progress... This award reminds us that political reform has not kept pace and that human rights must be respected.127 »
In January 2011, receiving Hu Jintao on a state visit, Barack Obama addressed the issue of human rights and suggested dialogue between China and the Dalai Lama128.

In 2013, John Camille Pecastaing, a professor at Johns Hopkins University, judged that "the foreign policy of the United States under Obama has become minimalist and reactive. It boils down to the use of killer drones in the fight against terrorism"129. Historian Perry Anderson also points out how "drone assassinations, which began under his predecessor, [became] the hallmark of the Nobel Peace Prize" and recalls that during his first term, "Obama ordered such an assassination every four days—a rate more than ten times higher than under President Bush."130

Former astronaut Charles F. Bolden was appointed NASA administrator in July 2009 and the Constellation program was cancelled. Instead, the Obama administration wants to outsource the transportation of astronauts to the International Space Station to the private sector. After a waltz-hesitation, the Orion manned vehicle program is restored, and a long-term goal of manned exploration of asteroids and eventually Mars is given to NASA, using a new giant launcher, the Space Launch System. Orion's first mission is scheduled for 2014.

Like Bill Clinton, Barack Obama radicalized his position as he rose politically. When he was a senator in Illinois, Obama passed a law that made it mandatory for police to film interrogations of defendants facing the death penalty, or face unfilmed confessions canceled. When he ran for U.S. Senator from Illinois, Obama said on television that the death penalty was used "too frequently and unconsciously" and recalled that "thirteen death row inmates were released in Illinois on grounds of innocence." He concluded by stating that although he approved of the death penalty when "the community is justified in expressing the full measure of its indignation", the number of capital crimes had to be reduced.131 During the presidential campaign, Obama also declared that bin Laden justified the use of the death penalty.132 Finally, on the same day it was rendered, he condemned a Supreme Court decision133 which declared the death penalty unconstitutional for persons convicted of rape of a minor without homicide (John McCain had just done the same thing in the morning). Once elected, Obama appointed Eric Holder, a personal opponent of the death penalty, as attorney general (a crucial position in the operation of the federal death penalty). At his hearing, Holder declared that he would apply "the law made by Congress." It was with his authorization that the death penalty was sought in federal court as soon as he took office in January 2009134.

He also supports the 2nd Amendment on the right to own firearms, but recognizes the usefulness of "common-sense laws in preventing guns from falling into the hands of children or gang members."134

Barack Obama is in favor of abortion rights; He first declared himself a supporter of civil union contracts between persons of the same sex (during his 2008 campaign, he was opposed to same-sex marriage135) and then called for the generalization of the extension of matrimonial rights and benefits to homosexuals up to marriage, both at the state and federal levels136. Finally, in May 2012, he became, in a highly publicized official announcement, the first American President to declare himself in favor of same-sex marriage137. Same-sex marriage was finally allowed under his tenure, in a Supreme Court decision on June 26, 2015.

Main article: Immigration to the United States
Although he is in favour of strengthening controls at the Mexican border, he defends the regularisation of illegal immigrants already present to whom he envisages granting driving licences110. In particular, he considers that without the influx of immigrant labor, American agriculture would "go out of business", signifying concretely its intention to promote family reunification and increase the number of regular immigrants138.

On November 20, 2014, in a televised address from the White House, Barack Obama announced a "deferred action" allowing about 45% of illegal immigrants to remain in the United States139. Up to 3.7 million individuals of undocumented parents, or who have been legally resident in the country for at least five years, are eligible for DACA status, which allows them to qualify for a work permit in the United States.140

Deportations of migrants have risen sharply under President Barack Obama. Between 2009 and 2016, three million people were deported to Mexico, earning the president the nickname "chief expeller" among critics of the policy.141


U.S. public debt between 1940 and 2014.
At the economic level, the Obama presidency is above all marked by the stimulus plan of nearly $ 800 billion launched by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, aimed at dealing with the subprime crisis.

Article détaillé : Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.
During his 2008 election campaign, Obama proposed a major reform of the American health care system allowing the creation, at the federal level, of a "universal health insurance", without imposing mandatory health coverage with the exception of children113. It was then one of his flagship projects of his campaign. Nevertheless, once elected president, to pass his text, Obama was forced to make concessions to get his bill passed by Congress. On November 7, 2009, almost 11 months after his inauguration and despite a comfortable majority in the House of Representatives, he narrowly obtained, by 220 votes to 215, the adoption of a text reforming the health system. Only one Republican, Joseph Cao, voted for reform. The U.S. Senate also passed its own bill on December 24, after lengthy debate and multiple amendments by a vote of 60 to 40. Finally, after many twists and turns, on March 21, 2010, despite unfavorable opinion polls, an aggravated polarization of the political class and American citizens, a presidential popularity at half-mast symbolized by the victory of a Republican in Massachusetts to succeed Ted Kennedy, despite finally the reluctance of some of the elected Democrats, the text voted by the Senate is adopted as such by the House of Representatives by 219 votes against 212.

Described as historic, the text, which received no opposition votes (a historic first for this type of legislation), guarantees health coverage to 32 million Americans who lack it. However, it falls far short of Barack Obama's election promises because it does not include, in particular, a universal public plan or even public insurance, and will leave 5% of US residents (23 million people) without any health coverage (compared to 15% before the reform)142.

Under the enactment, most Americans will be required to take out insurance by 2014 or face penalties.143 Grants will be provided by the federal government to help lowest-income families pay their premiums (incomes less than $88,000 per year.143 Companies with more than 50 employees (SMEs and traders) that do not provide cover will also have to pay penalties144. In addition, the text prohibits insurance companies from refusing to cover individuals because of their medical history143. Parents will also be able to protect their children up to the age of 26. Nevertheless, to achieve his goals and pass this law, Barack Obama announced that he would sign an executive order guaranteeing that the reform would not change the restrictions prohibiting the use of federal funds for abortions145, which he did on March 24, the day after the law was signed into law.146 Several fixes still need to be adopted by a budget bill by both chambers. The reform is expected to cost $940 billion (€695 billion) over ten years143. Its financing should be ensured by taxes on high incomes and lower health care expenditures143.

Congress had been debating this issue of health care for nearly a century. Republican President Theodore Roosevelt already mentioned it in his platform, but he was defeated in the 1912 U.S. presidential election by Democratic candidate Woodrow Wilson. In 1965, Democratic President Lyndon B. Johnson signed Medicare and Medicaid into law for the elderly and the poor, respectively, after winning half of the Republican votes in Congress. Democratic President Bill Clinton also tried to pass an ambitious project in 1993, but failed.

As soon as the law was signed into law by Barack Obama on March 23, 2009, the attorneys general (then fourteen) U.S. states declared that they were initiating a federal judicial process to challenge the constitutionality of the new law for violating state sovereignty147 while the legislatures of 37 states began debates aimed at adopting a notwithstanding statute so as not to have to apply the reform148. Then, on March 24, after the adoption in the Senate of two amendments tabled by the Republicans concerning procedural defects, the conciliation bill, adopted by the House of Representatives to implement the new law and which includes an extension of federal subsidies, increased state support for the Medicaid program, a broadening of the tax base and a reform of the student loan program,  must be returned to the House for a new vote, thereby delaying the implementation of the text.149

The conciliation law was in turn adopted by the Senate on 25 March 2010150. Reform then became one of the main themes of the 2010 midterm election campaign, with Republicans promising to repeal or modify it.


Nicolas Sarkozy welcomes Barack Obama during the G20 summit in Cannes, November 3, 2011.
During his election campaign, Barack Obama also advocated an increase in the minimum wage to be indexed to inflation,151 massive tax cuts for the middle class (for people earning less than $250,000 a year),152 the use of the tax credit to help the poorest households, and promised to renegotiate the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). In the context of the subprime crisis and the weight of credit, he declared that he wanted to protect American citizens against the abuse of loans of all kinds and announced a ten-year plan for major public works, financed by the withdrawal of combat forces from Iraq110.

Following his inauguration, President Barack Obama cancelled industrial programs deemed too expensive, unbudgeted or with ambition diverted from their purpose: this was notably the case of the Constellation program (cancelled on February 1, 2010) or the European radar shield project canceled on September 18, 2009 in order to obtain the Kremlin's support for the request to stop Iran's nuclear program153.

Since March 2009, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has been able to regulate any economic activity that produces carbon dioxide, on the grounds that above a certain undefined threshold, it constitutes a major pollutant, qualified as a "social injustice"154. Thus, 20% of thermal power plants in operation in January 2009 had to cease their activities; to fight against global warming, Barack Obama proposes to increase the price of electricity, to invest in biofuels, alternative energies113,155 and declares himself in favor of the establishment of a CO2 market obliging polluting companies to buy a "right to pollute" from non-polluting companies110. Subsidies are distributed to wind and photovoltaic companies, companies that produce very little electricity and are structurally loss-making156,157; at the same time, construction of a pipeline to bring oil from Alberta to Canada was halted at the request of the EPA, and exploration for the U.S. subsoil ceased in April 2009. Like his former Republican opponent in the 2008 presidential election, John McCain, he is also in favour of developing nuclear energy as a solution to climate problems, but his position on the subject became ambivalent during the election campaign158. On June 1, 2009, Secretary of Energy Steven Chu announced a $256 million fund to improve the energy efficiency of major industries in the United States.159

In the absence of a 60-vote majority in the Senate, consideration of the energy bill, passed by the House of Representatives in 2009, was adjourned on 22 July 2010, making its adoption unlikely. This setback, which did not translate into law the commitments made in Copenhagen, weakened the position of the American executive in the forthcoming international negotiations160.

On 9 October 2009, Barack Obama was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize161, causing surprise and disbelief in the world, even though he was only entering his tenth month in office. The Nobel committee justifies its decision by referring to "the extraordinary efforts of the President of the United States in favor of strengthening international diplomacy and cooperation among peoples". This decision is often described as political and partisan, rewarding words and good intentions more than concrete actions.162,163,164,165 Obama becomes the fourth president of the United States and the third in office to receive the award after Woodrow Wilson, Theodore Roosevelt and Jimmy Carter.


Protest against NSA surveillance in Germany.
Ten days before receiving the Nobel Prize, the President of the United States decided, with the agreement of the Senate, to send 30,000 American soldiers to continue the war in Afghanistan of 2001166. This triggered a strong controversy forcing the "war president", a nickname he received and which he did not reject167, to seek his Nobel Prize discreetly168. Only 19% of Americans think their president deserved the Nobel Peace Prize.168 Moreover, Barack Obama's administration has sold the most weapons since World War II, according to a US congressional report169.

While during his 2008 election campaign, he declared that he wanted to end the war, the New York Times points out that he is at the end of his second term, in November 2016, the only president of the United States to have served "two full terms at the head of a country at war"170 in different theaters of operations (Afghanistan,  Pakistan, Somalia, Yemen, Syria, Iraq, Cameroon and Uganda).171

2012 presidential election
Main article: 2012 United States presidential election

Obama receiving on November 29, 2012 at the White House the Republican Mitt Romney, opponent defeated in the presidential election.
On April 4, 2011, Barack Obama announced that he was running for a second presidential term in a video posted on his website entitled "It Begins With Us"172,173,174. As incumbent, he has no opponent for the Democratic Party primaries.175 On April 3, 2012, he assembled the 2,778 delegates from his party he needed to be nominated, and at the Democratic convention in Charlotte, North Carolina, former President Bill Clinton formally nominated Obama and Joe Biden in the general election for the positions of president and vice president.176 Republicans nominate Mitt Romney at the Republican convention in Tampa, Florida, August 28, 2012; he chose Paul Ryan as his running mate.

During the campaign, four televised debates were held, on October 3, October 11 (debate between Biden and Ryan for vice presidency), October 16 and October 22.177,178 Mitt Romney proved to be better overall than the incumbent president in the first debate and Obama's campaign was considered to be running out of steam, so much so that several polls indicated a possible victory for his Republican opponent179. But at the end of October, Hurricane Sandy halted Romney's rise and allowed Obama to highlight his role as head of state.180

On Tuesday, November 6, 2012, the day of the national election, Obama obtained 332 electors, surpassing the 270 necessary for his re-election.181,182,183 With 51% of the popular vote, he became the first president since Franklin D. Roosevelt to win back-to-back elections with a majority at the national level, having obtained 61% of the electoral votes (332 against 206 for his rival), 51% of the 129 million votes cast (for about 200 million registered voters out of 300 million inhabitants in the United States) — a lead of about 4.7 million votes over his opponent — and winning 26 states against 24 to 24. Mitt Romney. Obama nevertheless lost 3,583,000 votes and 2 percentage points compared to 2008, and won by obtaining a large majority among youth, women and minorities.184,185,186

On the night of his victory, he addressed his supporters in Chicago and declared: "Today you voted for action, not for politics. You elected us to focus on your jobs, not ours. And in the coming weeks and months, I look forward to working with the leaders of both parties."187 Barack Obama is officially inaugurated for a second term by taking the oath first at the White House on January 20, 2013, then at the foot of the Capitol in public on January 21.

Second presidential term

Barack Obama and Xi Jinping, in Beijing, 2014.
The first year of Obama's second term is marked by a series of controversies that affect his image and authority: the Benghazi tragedy, the failure of the gun control law, the eavesdropping of the National Security Agency (NSA), the excessive use of killer drones against Islamist suspects around the world,  its hesitations on the question of military intervention in Syria188,189. If the president denounces the systematic "obstructionism" of Republican elected officials, determined to discredit the implementation of his reform of the health system as well as the massive legalization of illegal immigrants from Latin America, they criticize the attitude of their Democratic colleagues as well as the authoritarianism and distance of the head of state. In order to reverse the trend, Obama announced several reforms in favor of the middle class, called "Grand Bargain" and inspired by Roosevelt's New Deal, such as reducing business taxes and hiring incentives; to do this, he multiplied the trips to the states of the country, but with mixed success190. He had to face the mistrust of his own majority, many Democrats having notably supported a text tabled in the House of Representatives to limit the prerogatives of the NSA and having opposed the appointment of economist Lawrence Summers as head of the Federal Reserve of the United States, which the Head of State had to renounce188.

The blocking of the representatives of the Republican Party on the federal budget of the United States, which they want to obtain the abandonment of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, means that, for the 18th time in its history and the first time since 1996191,192, the US federal administration must resort to a lockout ("shutdown") on October 1, 2013193. On October 17, an agreement was finally reached between the Democrats and Republicans that ended the shutdown while raising the debt ceiling. So Obamacare has not been changed. But the agreement only extends until January 15, 2014 for the federal budget, and February 7 for the authorization given to the Treasury to borrow on the markets (debt ceiling)194. In December 2013, the Obama administration finally backpedaled on its health reform because of numerous dysfunctions, postponing for millions of Americans for a year the obligation to subscribe to a health insurance policy195.


Obama with Merkel at the 2015 G7 summit in Bavaria.
Wishing at the beginning of his mandate to resume (reset) Russian-American relations and rally Moscow to the anti-Chinese cause, Obama nevertheless had to deal with Congress and federal agencies (CIA, Pentagon) in favour of containing Russia and direct control over neighboring states (Baltic countries, Ukraine, Georgia) through NATO196. The Snowden affair and the 2014 Ukrainian revolution are souring these relations, with Russia accusing US agencies of having played a triggering role in these events. When the eastern regions of the country revolted against the central government, Vladimir Putin was accused of encouraging a pro-Russian uprising, which led Barack Obama to initiate his policy of economic sanctions imposed on Russia196, while the first diplomatic crisis between Ukraine and Russia over Crimea dates back to May 5, 1992.  or immediately after the break-up of the USSR in December 1991, and seven years before his first term as head of the Russian Federation in 1999. Above all, this crisis made it possible to relaunch NATO196.


Obama and Saudi Arabia's King Salman in Riyadh in 2015.
Despite this new hotbed of tension, the President of the United States remains determined to continue his "diplomatic pivot" towards Asia, but must reassure his allies (Japan, South Korea), also plagued by territorial disputes, but with China. Sheila Smith, an expert at the Council on Foreign Relations, notes that "although the Obama administration says that there is no equation between Crimea and the Senkaku Islands, each ally is very sensitive on the issue of American firmness"197. In July 2015, he managed to conclude the negotiations with Iran in a positive manner198. This agreement damaged relations with Israel, already disrupted by the tense ties between Benjamin Netanyahu and Obama196, and those with Saudi Arabia, which, because of the energy self-sufficiency made possible by unconventional hydrocarbons, lost its role as the United States' privileged interlocutor in the region196. Following the migration crisis suffered by Europe in 2015, he announced that the United States would grant asylum to 10,000 Syrians to relieve overwhelmed countries, such as Hungary or Croatia. In 2016, he clearly expressed his opposition to Brexit, highlighting the security consequences and negative effects for the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership199.

After the shooting at Umpqua Community College in Oregon in September 2015, Obama strengthened his position in favor of legislation for better gun control. In early 2016, thanks to the strong economy regained by the United States, the unemployment rate close to full employment, the validation of its social security system to protect Americans against the costs of hospital care, the legalization of same-sex marriage throughout the United States (rendered Obergefell v. Hodges of the Supreme Court of the United States) as well as the obtaining of the power to negotiate its free trade law with the rest of the world, Barack Obama regains strong popularity in the United States200,201. As of July 2016, his level of popularity exceeded 51% of favorable opinions202, up to 60% during the last days of his mandate.

After the White House

Obama and Donald Trump, January 20, 2017.
In addition to the million dollars in annual pensions and allowances granted by the Former Presidents Act, the Obama couple benefits from income related to conferences, tours, books, films and podcasts.203

Since January 2017, the Obama couple has been staying in Washington, D.C. so that their youngest daughter Sasha can finish high school. For this purpose, they rent for $ 22,000 monthly a luxurious villa of 760 m2 built in 1928 and estimated at more than 5 million euros, with no less than eight bathrooms, nine bedrooms, two kitchens, a library, a gym, an entertainment room, a wine cellar, as well as a large courtyard that can accommodate up to ten vehicles204.

Paid Lecture Series
After leaving the White House, Barack Obama gave several lectures for Wall Street actors, including August 2017 at the private bank Northern Trust, from which he received $ 400,000; this drew criticism from Democrat Bernie Sanders; a few weeks later, he received the same amount for his intervention at a meeting of the Cantor Fitzgerald Bank.205,206

Publication of books
Two months after leaving the White House, Barack and Michelle Obama signed a contract worth more than $60 million to publish two books of memoirs (one each) with Penguin Random House.207 They announced, however, that they would donate a majority of the sum to charity.

Fondation Obama
In April 2017, he gave a lecture at the University of Chicago on the sidelines of a discussion on civic engagement and met with students. He wants to prepare the next generation of leaders.208

Positions
On 4 May 2017, four days before the second round of the 2017 French presidential election in which two candidates were running, Barack Obama, after declaring that he did not intend to be personally involved in non-American elections, gave his support to the candidate of En Marche, Emmanuel Macron, praising his ability "to appeal to the hopes of the population and not to its fears"209. The former president of the United States stressed that "the success of France matters to the whole world" and concluded his speech with a "On the move!" followed by a "Long live the France!" 210.

His intervention in the French presidential campaign is part of a project that Barack Obama wants to lead through his foundation: to breathe new life into progressive values, in the United States and around the world, to resist the rise of populist movements210. But Macron's campaign team made a mistake by translating the "liberal values" evoked by Barack Obama as "liberal values", where it should have read "progressive values", the word "liberal" not having the same meaning at all on both sides of the Atlantic211.

In March 2018, he gave his support in a letter to survivors of the Parkland shooting who are fighting for tougher gun laws in the United States, having himself failed to reform it following the Sandy Hook shooting in late 2012212.

Other elements and personality

Obama playing basketball with the U.S. Army at Camp Lemonnier in Djibouti in 2006.
A personality attached to his African-American roots, he has eclectic cultural tastes213; he is a great reader, writing his most important books and speeches himself, Barack Obama owes much of his political rise to his oratory skills and charisma.214,215,216 Although mixed-race, Obama is described as Black (in accordance with the old principle of the one drop of blood rule), and defines himself as Black.217,218

In their 2007 tax return, the Obama couple entered $4.2 million, largely from the copyrights of Barack Obama's books.

The Obama couple reported adjusted gross income of $2,656,902 (about €2 million) in April 2009 for their 2008 returns. In 2008, they paid $855,323 (about €647,000) in federal taxes and $77,883 (about €59,000) to the State of Illinois and donated $172,050 to 37 charities.219

Barack Obama is an avid basketball fan, which he continued to practice almost every morning during his election campaign, including on Election Day. He promised the installation of a suitable room in the White House. During the presidential campaign, he made a lot of laughter under the cameras during a clumsy attempt at bowling, a very popular sport in the United States. Once in the White House, he will also play golf with Vice President Biden on the green of the garden of the official residence. 220.

Barack Obama happens to be the fifth left-handed president in thirty years, after Gerald Ford, Ronald Reagan, George H. Bush and Bill Clinton. As he told photographers when signing his first official documents as president: "I'm left-handed, you'll have to get used to it."221

A very "connected" president, Barack Obama is a fan of social networks and new forms of communication222. Several observers have judged that social networks had a significant impact during his two elections in 2008 and 2012223,224,225,226. With more than 55 million followers227, he is the only politician whose Twitter account appears among the 10 most influential microblogging sites. Obama regularly stages himself in videos, as in his latest campaign with BuzzFeed seen by millions of people in a few hours: "Things Everybody Does But Doesn't Talk About, Featuring President Obama"228.

The fortune of the Obama couple is estimated in 2020 between 40 and 135 million dollars. The couple owned an eight-million-dollar home in Washington and another for $12 million on Martha's Vineyard Island in Massachusetts, in addition to their Chicago home.229

His great interest in the environment is shown by his upcoming participation in the narration of five episodes for "Our Great National Parks". The new Netflix documentary series will be released on April 13, 2022. It will highlight the most beautiful national parks in the world230.

Works
Works published in France
The Audacity of Hope: Thoughts on Reclaiming the American Dream, Presse de la cité, 2007 (ISBN 978-2-258-07451-4).
Les Rêves de mon père ["Dreams from My Father"] (trans. from English by Danièle Darneau), Presses De La Cité, 2008 (ISBN 978-2-258-07597-9).
De la race en Amérique (trans. François Clemenceau), Grasset, 2008 (ISBN 978-2-246-74141-1).
Les Grands Discours : Inaugural Speech "Yes we can", Points, 2009 (ISBN 978-275-781500-7).
Le Changement, nous peut y croire, Odile Jacob, 2009 (ISBN 978-273-812340-4).
La Promesse de l'Amérique, Buchet-Chastel, 2009 (ISBN 978-228-302404-1).
Speech: 20 January - 9 October 2009, Ecuador, 2009 (ISBN 978-284-990140-3).
Words of Peace for Humanity, Alphee, 2009 (ISBN 978-275-380-559-0).
On Race in America: The Philadelphia Speech, Lansman, 2010 (ISBN 978-2872827749).
Lettre à mes filles ["Of Thee I Sing: A Letter to My Daughters"] (trans. from English), La Martinière Jeunesse, 2011 (ISBN 978-2-732-44745-2).
Une terre promise, Paris, Fayard, 2020, 848 p. (ISBN 9782213706122).
Avec Bruce Springsteen, Born in the USA, Fayard, 2021 (ISBN 978-2-213-72162-0).
