The Nico Ditch, or sometimes Mickle Ditch or Nikker is a 9.7 km long earthwork located between Ashton-under-Lyne and Stretford in Greater Manchester, England. It could be a defensive fortification or a boundary built between the fifth and eleventh centuries. The ditch is still visible in part, especially over a 300 m stretch across the Denton Golf Club golf course. In the best-preserved sections, the ditch is 3.5 to 4.5 m wide and reaches up to 1.5 m deep. Part of the earthwork is protected as a Scheduled Ancient Monument. The approximation of the passage of the ditch on a map of Manchester. In red, the approximation of the passage of the ditch. It would have extended farther west than indicated. The Nico Ditch stretches 9.7 km from Ashton Moss in Ashton-under-Lyne to Hough Moss, east of Stretford. It passes through Denton, Reddish, Gorton, Levenshulme, Burnage, Rusholme, Platt Fields Park in Fallowfield, Withington and Chorlton--Hardy through four boroughs of what is now Greater Manchester. The rift coincides with the border between the boroughs of Stockport and Manchester, and between Tameside and Manchester to the golf course at Denton Golf Club. A section is now under the Audenshaw reservoirs built in the late nineteenth century5. The ditch would have extended westward beyond Stretford to Urmston. The Nico Ditch was built between the retreat of Roman troops to Brittany in the early fifth century and the Norman conquest in 1066. Its original purpose is unclear but it may have served as a defensive fortification or border. It may have marked a frontier for the expansionist Anglo-Saxons of the seventh century or perhaps it was a frontier to separate the kingdoms of Mercia and Northumbria in the late eighth and early ninth centuries. In the early Middle Ages, the kingdoms of Northumbria, Mercia and Wessex were fighting for control of North-West England at the same time as the Britons and Danes. Even if its primary interest remains unclear, it is certain that the ditch was used as a border in the Middle Ages. Legend has it that the Nico Ditch was completed in a single night by the people of Manchester as protection against the Vinking invasion around 869; Manchester is said to have been ravaged by the Danes in 870. According to history, each man had an area to build and was obliged to dig his section and build a ditch as deep as himself.8 According to nineteenth-century folklore, the rift was the site of a battle between the Saxons and the Danes; battle that should have given the towns of Gorton and Reddish their name, coming from "Gore Town" and "Red-Ditch", but the idea has been denied by historians as an urban legend. Indeed, the names come from "dirty farmstead" and "reedy ditch" respectively. A map of the Nico Ditch between Reddish and Slayde Hall at Longsight. A map of the Nico Ditch between Reddish and Slayde Hall at Longsight, printed in 1895. This part of the gap is still visible. Antique dealers and historians have been interested in this moat since the nineteenth century but most of its course has since been covered. Between 1990 and 1997, the University of Manchester Archaeological Unit cleared sections of the ditch at Denton, Reddish, Levennshulme and Platt Fields in an effort to determine its age and purpose. Studies have shown that the north face of the ditch dates from the twentieth century. The profile of the ditch, U-shaped rather than "V" as in trenches, suggests that the purpose of the earthwork was to mark a boundary. In conclusion, the ditch was most likely a border. Etymology[edit| code]
The first references to the ditch are found in a charter detailing the granting of land in Audenshaw to the monks of Kersal Cell. In a document dating from 1190 to 1212, the ditch is referred to as Mykelldiche or magnum fossatum which means great in Latin7. The name Nico (sometimes Nikker) is associated with the gap between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. It may be derived from the Anglo-Saxon Hnickar, a water spirit that seized and drowned unwary travelers. But the modern name certainly refers to the name Mykelldiche and its variations, because the Anglo-Saxon word micel means "great", which alludes to the descriptions of the early thirteenth century that spoke of a magnum fossatum. An alternative version says that Nico comes from the Anglo-Saxon word nǽcan meaning "to kill". Despite the weather, the ditch is still noticeable in short sections that can reach 3.5 to 4.5 m wide and up to 1.5 m deep. The 300 m stretch through the Denton Golf Club golf course and the section through Platt Fields Park are considered the best preserved parts. In 1997, part of the earthwork at Platt Fields Park was declared a Scheduled Ancient Monument. However, the rest of the ditch is unprotected. 
