MissingNo. (けつばん, Ketsuban?), sometimes spelled MissingNO, is an exception handling system in the Pokémon Red and Blue video games, likened to a species of Pokémon. Meaning "missing number" and described as a "programming error", MissingNo. is designed by the developers of Game Freak to appear during the game when accessing the data of a non-existent species of Pokémon. Flaws in the game's programming allow the player to encounter MissingNo. via a glitch.

MissingNo. was first mentioned by Nintendo in the May 1999 issue of Nintendo Power, which describes how to obtain it as well as the bugs it can cause. His appearance in Pokémon Red and Blue has been named one of the most famous glitches in video games by IGN and has been studied in several works of sociology. Fans of the series have also tried to find a logical explanation for MissingNo's presence. in the game world.

creating[edit| editing code]
The Pokémon franchise, developed by Game Freak for Nintendo and introduced in Japan in 1996, revolves around the concept of capturing and training 151 species of creatures called Pokémon to fight wild Pokémon and those of other Pokémon Trainers, whether non-player characters or other human players1. Pokémon's power in battle is determined by their attack, defense, and speed stats, and they can learn new abilities by accumulating experience points or if their trainer gives them certain items2. These abilities can also allow players to interact with the game world, for example by instantly moving between two cities3.

MissingNo. is not one of the 151 Pokémon4: it was designed as an exception handling system. The exception is in-game access to the data of a non-existent Pokémon species and, if it occurs, MissingNo. should appear5. Its name refers to this function since it means "missing number" in both Japanese and English. In Japanese, Ketsuban (けつばん) assembles the kanji "ktsu" (欠?, missing) and "ban" (番?, number); in English "MissingNo." is the contraction of "missing no"5,6. The Pokémon retains this name, sometimes spelled, "MissingNO4", in other languages.

Appearance[edit| edit code]
Image of MissingNo variants. At the top that of Pokémon Red and Green, at the bottom, those of Pokémon Yellow.
Other variants of MissingNo..
The method to trigger the appearance of MissingNo. was first described by Nintendo in the May 1999 issue of Nintendo Power magazine, in response to a reader6, while stating that "any contact with him can easily erase your save file or corrupt the game's graphics"N 1. The magazine explains that to meet MissingNo., the player must travel to the city of Jadielle in order to talk to an old man who explains how to capture a Pokémon; then he must use the "Flight" ability to get to Cramois'Île, and then use the "Surf" ability to drive along the east coast of the island, where MissingNo5,6 is located.

This appearance is due to a flaw in the random encounter system of wild Pokémon. In each area of the world, data about wild Pokémon present there is stored in a buffer that the game accesses when the player encounters a Pokémon. However, on the east coast of Cramois'Île, no data is placed in the buffer; It is therefore the information relating to the previously crossed area that is used instead7. However, Jadielle's explanation of the old man stores the player's name in the buffer. Therefore, if no area is visited in the meantime, the data used to determine the wild Pokémon encountered on the coast of Crimson Island are the hexadecimal values assigned to each letter of the player's name. If these values do not match a specific Pokémon, the exception handling system fires and brings up MissingNo5.

Once the Pokémon is encountered, the player can choose to fight it with their own Pokémon, capture it, or flee, just like any other Pokémon in the game8. If captured, MissingNo. is a fully functional Pokémon for the player: it can be used in battle and appears under the number "000" in the Pokédex, the fictional encyclopedia listing all Pokémon. Its types are "Bird" and "Normal", the type "Bird" being itself specific to this PokémonN 2. MissingNo. appears most often in a scrambled rectangular shape, although some meeting values have another shape such as a spectrum, a Ptera skeleton or a Kabutops skeleton8,N 3.

Regardless of the outcome of the battle, the game is affected by the use of glitch: for example, the sixth item in the player's bag is duplicated in 128 copies5, and the gallery of Pokémon that win the Pokémon League undergoes significant graphical alterations. Other temporary graphics problems may also appear9 but displaying the stats of another Pokémon or resetting the Game Boy is enough to eliminate them.

Home[edit| edit code]
Photo de William Sims Bainbridge.
American sociologist William Sims Bainbridge studied the effects of glitches like MissingNo. on players.
Although it only appears in three games in the series, the glitch has had a significant echo. Nintendo described MissingNo. as a "programming error"N 4 and warned players against encountering this Pokémon4,6, removing the glitch in the next game, Pokémon Yellow7, but it can still be encountered via a glitch similar to Mew's in Lavanville. Despite Nintendo's warnings, the method to meet MissingNo. has been published in numerous magazines and game guides7,10,11, and some players have even attempted to sell tricks — true or false — to capture it, for amounts up to $200.12

In 2009, IGN included MissingNo. in their Top Ten Easter Eggs in Video Games, describing it as a "glitchimon" and noting its usefulness for duplicating items available in limited quantities in the game13. In another article, IGN notes that MissingNo. "tells us a lot about Pokémon fans, who are willing to use a glitch that could have destroyed their game to increase the power of their Pokémon" N 5:5. MissingNo. is also at the origin of manymemes on the Internet14.

The home of MissingNo. by gamers has been the subject of several sociological studies on individuals and video games. Sociologist William Sims Bainbridge stated in a study of glitches in video games that Game Freak "gave birth to one of the most famous glitches in video game history"N 6, citing its creative use by gamers15. In his book Pikachu's Global Adventure: The Rise and Fall of Pokémon, Professor Julian Sefton-Green focuses on the breaking of the illusion caused by the appearance of MissingNo., which reminds the player that his game is "basically a computer program"N 7:16. The book Playing with Videogames explores the reception of MissingNo. in depth, describing the tendency of players to react to its appearance with curiosity17. The book also describes the creativity with which communities of Pokémon players have attempted to make it a true aspect of the Pokémon world through elements such as fanfiction or fanart.18 He also notes that people have helped to publicize the game's imperfections and the circumstances surrounding MissingNo's popularity. are a unique case that is unlikely to recur.19
